final.md, before:

# Final Writeup: Lock-Free Hash Table Implementations
## Brenda Thayillam & Emily Tsui

---

### [Proposal](https://emilytsui.github.io/ParaHash) | [Checkpoint](https://emilytsui.github.io/ParaHash/checkpoint) | [Final Writeup](https://emilytsui.github.io/ParaHash/final)

---

### Summary
For benchmarks, we implemented a sequential hash table to be run on only one thread and a fine-grained lock hash table that locks on each bucket. For our lock-free implementations, the first version we implemented has no memory management and allows for memory leaks to get around the ABA problem, which we based off [this research paper](http://www.research.ibm.com/people/m/michael/spaa-2002.pdf). We also implemented a version that uses the concept of a double CAS with a version tag, but since a double CAS is not available on the 64-bit machine, we used normal CAS and compiled our code for an x86 machine so that a pointer is 4 bytes. Our final implementation is compatible with hazard pointers provided by the [libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) library.

### Background
The key data structures in our project are a linked list node and a hash table. We have specialized linked list nodes for each of our implementation with some minor modifications (additional fields, etc). The key operations on are insert, lookup and delete on the hash tables. Inputs to these hash table operations are key-value pairs and outputs are boolean values indicating success or failure of the operation. Under high contention, a lock-based implementation would prevent multiple threads from making progress simultaneously; thus, with a lock-free approach high contention tasks should be able to complete quicker, as at least some operation is guaranteed to make progress.

Additionally, we had to work with data structures that contained hazard pointers for one of our lock-free hash table implementations.
![Hazard Pointer Diagram](hazptr_diagram.png)
As seen above, we used a global GuardArray from the [libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) library to "guard" our pointers when threads were still pointing to them, allocating 3 hazard pointer slots for each thread. Additionally, the libary provided us with the capability to "retire" pointers, indicating that they are to be deleted when they are no longer pointed to by other threads (i.e. they are no longer hazard pointers). By taking the set difference of the hazard pointer GuardArray and the retire array, the internals of the [libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) library freed nodes that were available to be freed.

### Approach
Our lock-free hash tables were implemented for the GHC machines. The main, initial lock-free algorithm that we implemented involved a hash table with sorted keys in its chains and a two-step deletion process. All three operations (insert, lookup, and delete) depend on one integral function – internal find. When nodes are inserted, internal find finds the node with the key being inserted or the next smallest and next largest values. Then, the new node is inserted using a CAS to set the next pointer. For lookups, the algorithm simply returned the output of internal find. For deletes, when a node to be deleted was found, it would be marked by setting a bit on the next pointer using a CAS operation and then the node would attempt to be removed from the corresponding hash table chain using another CAS operation. If this remove CAS failed, then some other thread already removed the current node and thus to remove the node that was to be removed by the other thread, the delete calls internal find. All three of these operations spin until successful completion. Within internal find, we check for marked nodes. Marked nodes indicate nodes that were meant to be deleted but haven’t yet been and thus internal find uses another CAS to delete the appropriate node.

With the DCAS implementation, all the CAS operations were performed with the next pointers and the tag of the current node. This implementation compiled specifically for x86 in order to allow DCAS operations, used the std::atomic::compare_exchange_weak in place of the gcc primitive compare and swap.

The hazard pointer implementation uses the libcds library. Each node that is deleted using the delete or internal find operation is sent to the retire list. When the retire list becomes sufficiently large, a set difference is performed between the retire list and the guard array containing hazard pointers. This set of nodes is then safely freed from memory.

All of these implementation were evaluated for performance using up to 16 threads as supported by the GHC machines’ hardware execution contexts (8 hyperthreaded cores) but then were scaled to more threads to understand the effects of thread scheduling in each implementation. Each of the threads was given a chunk of the instructions to execute where instructions were generated randomly with preset probability distributions of each operation. The instructions were stored in a vector and thus, interleaved execution of the instructions created false sharing as the various threads shared the same contiguous elements of the instruction array.

After all these modifications, we analyzed various dimensions of performance between the different implementations including how they compare to the sequential implementation, how they scale with various load factors, the resulting average CPU clock time per instruction, and the resulting average CPU clock time across all operations.


### Challenges
The ABA problem is a major challenge for lock-free data structures, so our implementations address it in different ways. Since lock free hash tables compare and swap at the node level, the ABA problem exists with the state of the node seeming to be the same based on address when it is in fact not in the same state. The most basic way to combat the ABA problem was to not free nodes after deleting them, ensuring that the same address couldn't be reused. We had to combine this ABA prevention scheme with a two-step deletion process required for hash table operations that prevented corruption of the overall structure. The two step deletion involved marking each node to be deleted followed by actually deleting the node form the hash table. Thus, even after addressing the ABA problem in this manner, we ran into some difficulties with marking the `next` pointer of each node; the `next` pointer of a node is marked if the node is about to be deleted, but of course when comparing pointers, we had to unmark the nodes and keep track of where we were marking and unmarking, which caused a lot of correctness problems. After getting the memory leak version of the lock-free hash table working, the hazard pointer implementation involved understanding the library source code to figure out how to integrate hazard pointers into our code.

One of our memory managing hash table implementations that also prevented the ABA problem used the double-compare-and-swap operation on nodes with version tags. In order to get this version working properly, we had to create an effective way of blocking the next pointer and the tag together in memory in order to perform a DCAS operation on the entire chunk of data. We further had to get it compiled to x86 in order to even make the DCAS feasible. This implementation caused difficulties because it still used the two-step deletion process and thus needed to be able to modify the next and tag values individually in addition to together with the DCAS operation. Realizing that the gcc compare-and-swap primitive only accepted long long values, we resorted to using std::atomic::compare_exchange_weak which resulted in a lot of experimentation with the various memory synchronization methods in order to find the optimal. Even the sequential implementation on x86 was found to have worse performance than on 64-bit and thus we had to ensure that all performance tests performed with the DCAS implementation were separate and involved measures relative to other x86 benchmarks.

### Results
Since we based our lock-free solution off [this research paper](http://www.research.ibm.com/people/m/michael/spaa-2002.pdf), we wanted to replicate the graphs they provided to see if our implementation achieved the same or better results. We tested on a test file of similar load as the one they tested on - with 1,000,000 operations, we had 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups. Below, we have comparisons of the graphs of our results on the left to the graphs provided by the research paper on the right. It should be noted that in the research paper, which was published in 2002, their graphs were of results from running code on a 4-core IBM machine. Our code was run on a 8-core hyperthreaded GHC machine, which would be much faster than the machine they ran it on. The graphs show the average CPU time (microseconds/operation) on increasing thread counts.

As shown, all our implementations' average CPU time tend to increase as more threads perform operations simultaneously, even though the load factors are relatively small. We believe this to be as a result of the random generation of our test files. While we calculated the right percentage of inserts to get the average load factor we wanted, we used a random number generator when inserting keys into the hash table, so there is a very good possibility that the keys are not actually distributed evenly. The general trend is that our memory leak implementation performs better than the lock-based implementation for each of the different load factors. This is a result of the lock-based implementation having to lock the bucket even on lookup to ensure that no other thread removes a node while someone else is iterating in a situation of high contention, while the lock-free implementation does not have this problem because of its non-blocking characterstic.

However, our hazard pointer implementation takes consistently longer to perform operations for each of the different load factors, and this has to do with the extra overhead it needs to assign pointers to the guard array to ensure they are protected until they are no longer pointed to. The extra overhead for library function calls when assigning pointers to the guard array and retiring pointers to the retire array likely caused a slowdown. Additionally, hazard pointers implementations naturally have the additional step of performing a set difference between the retire array and guard array to determine which pointers are allowed to be freed. Since we were restricted by the library from assigning an additional thread to do this scanning, a working thread would have to perform this work, slowing down the average CPU time.

It did not make sense to compare our "DCAS" implementation with these other implementations because thaat implementation was built for an x86 machine, meaning the absolute time it took per operation was significantly slower than our other implementations run on a 64-bit machine.

<img src="lf1_avg_ops.png" width="500"/> <img src="loadfac1_research.png" width="350"/>
This graph shows our results for an average load factor of 1 on a file with 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups.

<img src="lf5_avg_ops.png" width="500"/> <img src="loadfac5_research.png" width="350"/>
This graph shows our results for an average load factor of 5 on a file with 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups.

<img src="lf10_avg_ops.png" width="500"/> <img src="loadfac10_research.png" width="350"/>
This graph shows our results for an average load factor of 10 on a file with 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups.

### Preliminary Results
We found in our preliminary research that inserts and deletes are the most commonly performed operations. Thus for our tests with various percentages of deletes and inserts & lookups happening with the same likelihood, our results were:
![30% Delete Plot](30p_del_plot.png)
![20% Delete Plot](20p_del_plot.png)
![10% Delete Plot](10p_del_plot.png)
In all three of these plots, the fine grained and memory leak version peak at 16 threads because that is the total number of available execution contexts on the GHC machines. Then for more threads beyond this point, the memory leak lock free version performs slightly better than the fine grained version because for the locking version if the thread holding the bucket's lock gets scheduled out then no progress can be made on operations on that bucket. Although the DCAS and hazard pointer had less overall speedup due to the overhead of memory management, the above results clearly show that these results scale better with more threads. 

Then evaluated on a workload with an uniform amount of all three operations, we achieved:
![Uniform Plot](Uniform_plot.png)
This plot clearly indicates that in the the uniform case, DCAS and hazard pointers scale well and perform better than the fine grained and memory leak versions at higher thread counts.

To further explore the effects of the load factor on the performance, we found:
![Uniform Plot](load_factor_plot.png)
In this plot it is evident that both the fine grained and memory leak version indicate a general increase in speedup with a larger load factor although the memory leak version has a greater speedup (due to allowing multiple operations on the same bucket simultaneously). The DCAS performance stays relatively the same while the hazard pointer implementation gets worse with larger load factors.

Commit message:

Added load factor 16 threads graph

final.md, after:

# Final Writeup: Lock-Free Hash Table Implementations
## Brenda Thayillam & Emily Tsui

---

### [Proposal](https://emilytsui.github.io/ParaHash) | [Checkpoint](https://emilytsui.github.io/ParaHash/checkpoint) | [Final Writeup](https://emilytsui.github.io/ParaHash/final)

---

### Summary
For benchmarks, we implemented a sequential hash table to be run on only one thread and a fine-grained lock hash table that locks on each bucket. For our lock-free implementations, the first version we implemented has no memory management and allows for memory leaks to get around the ABA problem, which we based off [this research paper](http://www.research.ibm.com/people/m/michael/spaa-2002.pdf). We also implemented a version that uses the concept of a double CAS with a version tag, but since a double CAS is not available on the 64-bit machine, we used normal CAS and compiled our code for an x86 machine so that a pointer is 4 bytes. Our final implementation is compatible with hazard pointers provided by the [libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) library.

### Background
The key data structures in our project are a linked list node and a hash table. We have specialized linked list nodes for each of our implementation with some minor modifications (additional fields, etc). The key operations on are insert, lookup and delete on the hash tables. Inputs to these hash table operations are key-value pairs and outputs are boolean values indicating success or failure of the operation. Under high contention, a lock-based implementation would prevent multiple threads from making progress simultaneously; thus, with a lock-free approach high contention tasks should be able to complete quicker, as at least some operation is guaranteed to make progress.

Additionally, we had to work with data structures that contained hazard pointers for one of our lock-free hash table implementations.
![Hazard Pointer Diagram](hazptr_diagram.png)
As seen above, we used a global GuardArray from the [libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) library to "guard" our pointers when threads were still pointing to them, allocating 3 hazard pointer slots for each thread. Additionally, the libary provided us with the capability to "retire" pointers, indicating that they are to be deleted when they are no longer pointed to by other threads (i.e. they are no longer hazard pointers). By taking the set difference of the hazard pointer GuardArray and the retire array, the internals of the [libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) library freed nodes that were available to be freed.

### Approach
Our lock-free hash tables were implemented for the GHC machines. The main, initial lock-free algorithm that we implemented involved a hash table with sorted keys in its chains and a two-step deletion process. All three operations (insert, lookup, and delete) depend on one integral function – internal find. When nodes are inserted, internal find finds the node with the key being inserted or the next smallest and next largest values. Then, the new node is inserted using a CAS to set the next pointer. For lookups, the algorithm simply returned the output of internal find. For deletes, when a node to be deleted was found, it would be marked by setting a bit on the next pointer using a CAS operation and then the node would attempt to be removed from the corresponding hash table chain using another CAS operation. If this remove CAS failed, then some other thread already removed the current node and thus to remove the node that was to be removed by the other thread, the delete calls internal find. All three of these operations spin until successful completion. Within internal find, we check for marked nodes. Marked nodes indicate nodes that were meant to be deleted but haven’t yet been and thus internal find uses another CAS to delete the appropriate node.

With the DCAS implementation, all the CAS operations were performed with the next pointers and the tag of the current node. This implementation compiled specifically for x86 in order to allow DCAS operations, used the std::atomic::compare_exchange_weak in place of the gcc primitive compare and swap.

The hazard pointer implementation uses the libcds library. Each node that is deleted using the delete or internal find operation is sent to the retire list. When the retire list becomes sufficiently large, a set difference is performed between the retire list and the guard array containing hazard pointers. This set of nodes is then safely freed from memory.

All of these implementation were evaluated for performance using up to 16 threads as supported by the GHC machines’ hardware execution contexts (8 hyperthreaded cores) but then were scaled to more threads to understand the effects of thread scheduling in each implementation. Each of the threads was given a chunk of the instructions to execute where instructions were generated randomly with preset probability distributions of each operation. The instructions were stored in a vector and thus, interleaved execution of the instructions created false sharing as the various threads shared the same contiguous elements of the instruction array.

After all these modifications, we analyzed various dimensions of performance between the different implementations including how they compare to the sequential implementation, how they scale with various load factors, the resulting average CPU clock time per instruction, and the resulting average CPU clock time across all operations.


### Challenges
The ABA problem is a major challenge for lock-free data structures, so our implementations address it in different ways. Since lock free hash tables compare and swap at the node level, the ABA problem exists with the state of the node seeming to be the same based on address when it is in fact not in the same state. The most basic way to combat the ABA problem was to not free nodes after deleting them, ensuring that the same address couldn't be reused. We had to combine this ABA prevention scheme with a two-step deletion process required for hash table operations that prevented corruption of the overall structure. The two step deletion involved marking each node to be deleted followed by actually deleting the node form the hash table. Thus, even after addressing the ABA problem in this manner, we ran into some difficulties with marking the `next` pointer of each node; the `next` pointer of a node is marked if the node is about to be deleted, but of course when comparing pointers, we had to unmark the nodes and keep track of where we were marking and unmarking, which caused a lot of correctness problems. After getting the memory leak version of the lock-free hash table working, the hazard pointer implementation involved understanding the library source code to figure out how to integrate hazard pointers into our code.

One of our memory managing hash table implementations that also prevented the ABA problem used the double-compare-and-swap operation on nodes with version tags. In order to get this version working properly, we had to create an effective way of blocking the next pointer and the tag together in memory in order to perform a DCAS operation on the entire chunk of data. We further had to get it compiled to x86 in order to even make the DCAS feasible. This implementation caused difficulties because it still used the two-step deletion process and thus needed to be able to modify the next and tag values individually in addition to together with the DCAS operation. Realizing that the gcc compare-and-swap primitive only accepted long long values, we resorted to using std::atomic::compare_exchange_weak which resulted in a lot of experimentation with the various memory synchronization methods in order to find the optimal. Even the sequential implementation on x86 was found to have worse performance than on 64-bit and thus we had to ensure that all performance tests performed with the DCAS implementation were separate and involved measures relative to other x86 benchmarks.

### Results
Since we based our lock-free solution off [this research paper](http://www.research.ibm.com/people/m/michael/spaa-2002.pdf), we wanted to replicate the graphs they provided to see if our implementation achieved the same or better results. We tested on a test file of similar load as the one they tested on - with 1,000,000 operations, we had 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups. Below, we have comparisons of the graphs of our results on the left to the graphs provided by the research paper on the right. It should be noted that in the research paper, which was published in 2002, their graphs were of results from running code on a 4-core IBM machine. Our code was run on a 8-core hyperthreaded GHC machine, which would be much faster than the machine they ran it on. The graphs show the average CPU time (microseconds/operation) on increasing thread counts.

As shown, all our implementations' average CPU time tend to increase as more threads perform operations simultaneously, even though the load factors are relatively small. We believe this to be as a result of the random generation of our test files. While we calculated the right percentage of inserts to get the average load factor we wanted, we used a random number generator when inserting keys into the hash table, so there is a very good possibility that the keys are not actually distributed evenly. The general trend is that our memory leak implementation performs better than the lock-based implementation for each of the different load factors. This is a result of the lock-based implementation having to lock the bucket even on lookup to ensure that no other thread removes a node while someone else is iterating in a situation of high contention, while the lock-free implementation does not have this problem because of its non-blocking characterstic.

However, our hazard pointer implementation takes consistently longer to perform operations for each of the different load factors, and this has to do with the extra overhead it needs to assign pointers to the guard array to ensure they are protected until they are no longer pointed to. The extra overhead for library function calls when assigning pointers to the guard array and retiring pointers to the retire array likely caused a slowdown. Additionally, hazard pointers implementations naturally have the additional step of performing a set difference between the retire array and guard array to determine which pointers are allowed to be freed. Since we were restricted by the library from assigning an additional thread to do this scanning, a working thread would have to perform this work, slowing down the average CPU time.

It did not make sense to compare our "DCAS" implementation with these other implementations because thaat implementation was built for an x86 machine, meaning the absolute time it took per operation was significantly slower than our other implementations run on a 64-bit machine.

<img src="lf1_avg_ops.png" width="500"/> <img src="loadfac1_research.png" width="350"/>
This graph shows our results for an average load factor of 1 on a file with 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups.

<img src="lf5_avg_ops.png" width="500"/> <img src="loadfac5_research.png" width="350"/>
This graph shows our results for an average load factor of 5 on a file with 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups.

<img src="lf10_avg_ops.png" width="500"/> <img src="loadfac10_research.png" width="350"/>
This graph shows our results for an average load factor of 10 on a file with 10% deletes, 10% inserts, and 80% lookups.

Next, we decided to look at speedups obtained when looking at the time it took to complete all operations in a test file as load factors increased. For each implementation, we compared the total time it took to complete the operations on 16 threads to the time it took for the single-threaded sequential hash table to complete the operations. For our "DCAS" implementation, we compared that to our sequential hash table built for an x86 machine to get an accurate relative speedup.

<img src="load_factor_plot.png" width="500"/>
As expected, the memory leak implementation is scaling well in relation to increased load factor because even in growing contention for the buckets, multiple threads can still make progress simultaneously. However, we see that the fine-grain lock implementation is getting approximately exponentially slower, which is what we expect because when there is higher contention for the buckets, still only one thread can hold the bucket's lock at a time. The hazard pointer implementation is actually getting slower with more threads, and we believe this to be because of false sharing with both the guard array that holds the hazard pointers and the retire array that holds pointers to be freed. While each thread has its own slots in the guard array, the whole array is still global, meaning multiple threads from different cores trying to access it will cause false sharing. Additionally, the retire array is also global, and while its actual implementation is handled by the library we use, ...............................................

### Preliminary Results
We found in our preliminary research that inserts and deletes are the most commonly performed operations. Thus for our tests with various percentages of deletes and inserts & lookups happening with the same likelihood, our results were:
![30% Delete Plot](30p_del_plot.png)
![20% Delete Plot](20p_del_plot.png)
![10% Delete Plot](10p_del_plot.png)
In all three of these plots, the fine grained and memory leak version peak at 16 threads because that is the total number of available execution contexts on the GHC machines. Then for more threads beyond this point, the memory leak lock free version performs slightly better than the fine grained version because for the locking version if the thread holding the bucket's lock gets scheduled out then no progress can be made on operations on that bucket. Although the DCAS and hazard pointer had less overall speedup due to the overhead of memory management, the above results clearly show that these results scale better with more threads. 

Then evaluated on a workload with an uniform amount of all three operations, we achieved:
![Uniform Plot](Uniform_plot.png)
This plot clearly indicates that in the the uniform case, DCAS and hazard pointers scale well and perform better than the fine grained and memory leak versions at higher thread counts.

To further explore the effects of the load factor on the performance, we found:
![Uniform Plot](load_factor_plot.png)
In this plot it is evident that both the fine grained and memory leak version indicate a general increase in speedup with a larger load factor although the memory leak version has a greater speedup (due to allowing multiple operations on the same bucket simultaneously). The DCAS performance stays relatively the same while the hazard pointer implementation gets worse with larger load factors.
