README.md, before:

# Project Proposal: Parallel Debugging Tool for OpenMP and CUDA
## Brenda Thayillam & Emily Tsui
---


### Summary
We will be creating a parallel debugging tool for C++ programs that use OpenMP or CUDA programs on GPUs, specifially analyzing arithmetic intensity, percentage peak performance, memory access patterns, and potential speedup. We will be using this on the GHC machines, and the user will be able to provide specifications for the machines to simulate it on.

### Background
Arithmetic intensity is a measure of floating-point operations performed in a given code relative to the amount of memory accesses that are required to perform these operations. Given the specifications of the machine, the percentage peak performance provides a measure of the proportion of time that execution resources are remaining idle when they can be performing useful work. False sharing occurs when multiple threads write to different addresses, but the addresses happen to fall on the same cache line. This causes the cache line to bounce between processors because they are each seeking exclusive access to the cache line on every write. Potential speedup involves looking at the code and how it would scale in relation to the number of processors it is run on. Amdahl's Law gives a theoretical speedup of the execution of a task given the proportion of sequential to potentially parallel code and how it scales with number of processors. All of these concepts can be applied to determine performance problems that could be causing issues in parallel code. A major source of parallelism in the project will be the parsing of the C++ file for information pertaining to each performance metric because each performance metric is independent although there may be the dependency of considering the same line for multiple metrics.

### Challenge
In order to make the parallel debugging tool as useful as possible, we need to have a deep understanding of the concepts mentioned above and be able to analyze how different lines of code could affect performance. The memory access pattern will be especially hard to analyze, as we will need a thorough understanding in order to come up with a good method of analysis for it.

### Resources
- We will refer to 15-418 lecture slides and other relevant papers to more thoroughly understand parallel performance metrics
- We will be coding from scratch
- We will be referring to/using Intel's PIN tool
- The project will be developed on GHC machines and locally

### Goals and Deliverables
#### Plan to achieve
- Good performance of the debugging tool
- Allows the user to provide specifications for the machine they would like to simulate on
- Analyzes arithmetic intensity of OpenMP and CUDA code
- Analyzes percentage peak performance of OpenMP and CUDA code
- Analyzes bandwidth usage (bandwidth bound: Yes/No)
- Analyzes problem-constrained scaling of OpenMP and CUDA code
- Analyzes false sharing of OpenMP and CUDA code
- Analyzes potential speedup (relative speedup achievable if resources used properly)

#### Hope to achieve
- Generate instruction dependency DAG
- Analyzes other memory access patterns of OpenMP and CUDA code (cache performance, memory allocation/deallocation, etc.)
- Analyzes workload balance of OpenMP and CUDA code

#### Deliverables
- A C++ program which can analyze parallel performance problem in OpenMP and CUDA code (sequential and parallel)
- Evaluation: Testing Harness with a set of predefined C++ test files with known performance metrics - correctness
- Evaluation: Speedup plot of parallel implementations relative to original sequential implementation - performance

### Platform Choice
The code will be written in C++ because we plan to use Open MP to gain good performance in our code. We will be developing on the GHC machines because our code should not be too compute intensive.

### Schedule
- April 10 – 16: Read up on performance measurement techniques (Intel's PIN) & create test harness with 10 programs with known performance metrics (OpenMP & CUDA)
- April 17 – 23: Complete sequential analyzer with dependency DAG generator
- April 24 – 30: Parallelize analysis tool for better performance
- May 1 – 7: Complete parallel implementation. Analyze performance relative to sequential. Attempt to create load analyzer (if time)
- May 8 – 12: Finish up and finalize project

Commit message:

Changed project idea to lock-free hash table implementation

README.md, after:

# Project Proposal: Lock-Free Hash Table Implementations
## Brenda Thayillam & Emily Tsui
---


### Summary
We will be implementing one lock-free hash table optimized for inserts and one lock-free hash table optimized for deletes and potentially allow the ability for dynamic switching between the two implementations based on access patterns of the program the structures are being used in.

### Background
Lock-free hash tables guarantee that multiple threads performing operations on the data structure will have their operation performed within a finite amount of time independent of other operations. Lock-free data structures generally perform better than lock-based implementations because of their non-blocking characteristic that allows parallel execution of threads. To get around locking, they are implemented using Compare-And-Swap operations, which replaces an old value if the current value is what the thread expects it to be.

### Challenge
It's hard to make a good performance lock-free hash table because of issues that can arise once operations cannot be synchronized with locks. This means there need to be mechanisms in place that maintain correct behavior of the data structure but still provide good performance. While it might not be as hard to optimize for either insert or delete, it's hard to achieve optimal performance on all operations.

### Resources
- We will refer to 15-418 lecture slides and other relevant papers to more thoroughly understand parallel performance metrics
- We will be coding from scratch
- We will be referring to the algorithms discussed in this research paper: http://www.research.ibm.com/people/m/michael/spaa-2002.pdf

### Goals and Deliverables
#### Plan to achieve
- Baseline sequential hash table testing harness
- Implementation of fine-grained lock-based hash table
- Implementation of insert-optimized lock-free hash table (based on research paper)
- Implementation of delete-optimized lock-free hash table

#### Hope to achieve
- Dynamic balancer that can determine when to switch between our two implemented lock-free hash tables based on access patterns

#### Deliverables
- An insert-optimized lock-free hash table
- A delete-optimized lock-free hash table
- Evaluation: Correctness based on sequential hash table testing harness
- Evaluation: Performance compared to sequential and fine-grained hash table implementations

### Platform Choice
The code will be written in C++, and we plan to use GCC's implementation of compare and swap. We will be developing on the GHC machines because our code should not be too compute intensive.

### Schedule
- April 10 – 16: Read up on and understand algorithms in research paper & create sequential test harness with different insertion and deletion patterns
- April 17 – 23: Complete fine-grained lock-based hash table and delete-optimized lock-free hash table
- April 24 – 30: Complete insert-optimized lock-free hash table
- May 1 – 7: Run performance testing and if time, work on dynamic balancer between the two implementations
- May 8 – 12: Finish up and finalize project
